Cool, so a state of the platform,
before actually seeing examples
of how they look like.
First, every browser supports PWA,
because it's just the web, right,
which is kind of, yeah, I mean,
it's a right answer, but
probably not the answer
you are looking for, okay?
Because sometimes when we
are talking about the PWA platform,
we are talking about
installation at least, okay?
And yeah, because this is the web and
it can be used in the browser,
if you have a browser,
it will render your web app.
Maybe it's not installable, so
let's try to talk about installability.
So I'm keeping a list, and I'm updating
a list in my website, firt.dev/notes/pwa.
This is kind of the only place that
it's available on the web these
days to know where a PWA is installable,
okay, with details.
And on Android, for example, it's
currently available on all web browsers.
All the main web browsers or
the first ten, of course,
on Android you have ten web
browsers that no one is using, but
Chrome, Edge, Firefox,
Opera, Vivaldi, Brave.
So most of the most common,
Dolphin, Android web browsers,
they support PWA installation because
most of them are chromium based, and
chromium supports PWA installation.
But Firefox also support PWA
installations on Android.
Okay, so that's pretty simple.
So if you are in a PWA on Android,
you can install it, and
it will convert into an Android app,
and we'll see that process later.
On iOS and iPadOS, it's on Safari, so if
you're in Safari, you can install a PWA.
What happens with other browsers?
Well, that has been changed in the past,
let's say that you can install PWAs
from other browsers with a twist,
so let's try to understand that twist.
First, we need to know where we are,
because now we have two different iOS.
We have the European Union iOS,
and the rest of the world iOS,
at least while we're shooting this video.
So in the rest of the world, actually,
right now, even in EU countries,
it's just the same.
So does anyone have iPhone here,
let's see.
Okay, are you using Chrome?
>> Student 1: I usually just use Safari,
since that's the only engine
that they allow at this time.
>> Maximiliano Firtman: Safari is the only
engine that they allow at this time.
So Chrome on iOS,
Firefox on iOS, Edge on iOS,
it's just Safari with different scheme.
I'm simplifying the definition,
but it's kind of that, so
it's not really Chrome,
it's not really Firefox.
Now, in EU countries,
Chrome could create a real Chrome,
they didn't do that yet, and
I'm not sure they will do that.
But now they are allowed in EU
countries only to use their own engine,
okay, browsers, they are allowed
to that only in EU countries.
But anyway, it doesn't matter if it's
a real other browser in EU countries or
like a simulation, as we have right
now in the rest of the world.
You can install PWAs, but
only following Apple rules.
And the installed PWA in the system will
use always WebKit, Safari as the engine.
So even if Chrome creates a chromium
version for iOS in EU countries,
and you install a PWA in EU countries,
it will use Safari,
at least as of today,
okay, that's the twist.
HarmonyOS, that's a Huawei
operating system.
Well, mostly targeting Chinese devices,
also they have some use base in China,
other Southeast Asia countries,
also some Latin American countries,
mostly South America.
The native browser has
its own main browser and
you can install PWAs from there, and
they become an install app there as well.
And Meta Horizon OS, I'm not sure
if you know what that OS is for.
Actually, it's a new name for
the operating system that right now
it's the operating system
behind the Meta Quest 3,
the VR headset or
the mixed reality headset.
And new headsets will appear in the future
using also the Meta Horizon operating
system, it supports PWAs.
And in this case the only difference
is that the installation is not through
the browser, but through the Meta Store.
So you publish your PWA on a web
server and then you need to go and
fill a form saying I have a PWA
that I wanna publish for this uses.
And it will go through quality
assurance because VR can make you sick.
So it's not so simple as let anyone
install apps without reviewing the app.
Okay, because it has to do with health,
okay, mental health and so on.
So that's why physical health, so
that's why they are forcing
going through the store,
but you can do then 2D or
VR PWAs for Meta.
So what about the desktop?
On macOS, you can install
PWAs from Safari, Chrome, and
Edge, so most of the browsers.
Not here and not other browser, for
example, Brave it's not supported.
Linux, Chrome and Edge, ChromeOS,
it has only Chrome, and
you can install Firefox as well,
but it's not common.
And Windows,
actually this is pretty cool in terms
of the amount of Windows that we have.
Chrome, Edge on Windows 7, 8, 10, and 11.
From Windows 7, you can install PWAs, if
you're using Chrome or Edge as browsers.
There is one big missing here in
this slide, I'm sure if you can
spot which one is missing, and
it's a big name, and it's not Safari.
>> Student 2: Brave,
>> Maximiliano Firtman: Brave, no,
even Firefox.
I mean, Brave is also there, but
I think that Firefox is bigger.
Firefox for
desktop is not implementing web apps.
They used to have it with some
kind of an experiment, and
they say internally that we're
not going to push this, so
right now they are behind the rest
of the browsers, even Safari.
>> Maximiliano Firtman: And I know some
users that they were Firefox users that
they stopped using Firefox because
the lack of web app installations.
>> Maximiliano Firtman: So for
example, this is how Trivago is a PWA,
so this is Windows.
So you can install Trivago from there so
you install it and
then you have a full Windows application.
I'm showing you a video of
Windows because I'm on a Mac, so
I will show you a video on Windows.
And after it was installed, it's in
the start menu, this is Windows 10, so
it appears like any other in
the start menu or start screen,
appears like any other app in the system.
Okay, so
that's how it looks like on windows.
I have the Starbucks PWA as well, so
you can order coffee from your desktop,
that's another PWA in windows.
Tinder, I know someone told me about
Tinder, I don't know what Tinder is for,
but it's a PWA as well, and it appears
in the alt tab as any other web app.
Okay, this is Chromebooks,
ChromeOS by a part of the same experience.
I'm opening here several PWA, and
you can see they have their own window.
So once you open them,
they are at the dock, and
once you open them, again,
Starbucks, they look like an app.
I mean, from a user perspective,
the user doesn't know it's a PWA.
And the user shouldn't know actually, it's
just an app, it's a Starbucks app, okay,
you want a coffee.
I don't care if it's web app native,
okay, it's just an app.
So it's kind of the same thing here and
I have just a screenshot here because
just to prove, I'm not sure if
you recognize the start logo there
at the bottom, that's Windows 7.
The same Starbucks application
installed on Windows 7.
And probably you're thinking, well,
who is using Windows 7 these days?
Lot of companies, lot of banks.
And if you're doing
enterprise applications,
PWA is a great platform, why?
I'm not sure if you have experience
doing app for banks, for example,
or for large companies with old terminals.
Deploying a desktop application is
really painful for security purposes,
you cannot just send them
an executable and they install it.
They don't have installation permissions,
they don't have anything, so
it's actually very difficult to
deploy apps on those devices.
But you know what, if they have Chrome
on Windows 7 or Edge on Windows 7,
they can install PWAs without
any special permission.
You send them a URL by email,
go there, they enter the URL, and
the users can install it from the browser,
and
they will get an app experience
on Windows 7 without any other.
They don't need to call the team,
the technical team, to install the app,
it has happened,
it has worked because this is important.
The PWA, even if it's an app,
a native app, as Steve Jobs was saying,
it's secure because it's still working
under the web browser umbrella,
it's using the same
security as the browser.
So if it's secure to
browse to that website,
it will be secure to use
it from its own window.
>> Student 3: Oscar in the chat says,
WhatsApp is one of the best PWA.
>> Maximiliano Firtman: Yeah, WhatsApp is
also a PWA, and sometimes they create it
also a native client, the native client
inside is actually using a web view.
So it's kind of a hybrid,
they're using a hybrid approach, but
yeah, there are a lot of really good PWAs,
and
the best PWAs that I've seen
are actually corporate PWAs.
There is a big market of
corporate applications, I mean,
application for desktop, for users,
that it's actually pretty cool.
Of course, they are not well
known because it's just for
their employees, but
that's actually really good target.
Before that they were doing .net
applications or things like that.
Then they can be multi-platform
because they work on Mac, on Linux,
on Chromebooks, on tablets as well, so it
works everywhere from the same code base.